# Introduction
The Linnaean taxonomic system is a means of classifying life using a fixed number of categories, known as ranks. It was first published in Carl Linnaeus's 'Systema Naturae' in 1735. The taxonomic system has been refined multiple times since its inception, though this refinement has been predominantly in the realm of deciding where the boundaries should be placed amongst groups. Far less refinement has gone into the architecture of the final system, which exists much in the same way that Carl Linnaeus first created it.

## Issues arising
However, there are significant errors in the design of the Linnaean taxonomic system which result in drastically reduced accuracy. One of the most problematic aspects Linnaeus subscribed to was the idea that everything had a given 'true form' that man would inherently recognise. By working out what this 'true form' was, Linnaeus hoped to arrive at a perfect, ordered system of classification for the natural world. Whilst not a surprising viewpoint from the era, the assumption of the existence of a true form has caused numerous difficulties ever since its inception. Whilst taxonomists have (in practice) rendered the idea of 'true form' obsolete whilst working with type specimens, the idea of a 'true form' still rules absolute in the nomenclature system.

For example, the taxonomists working on the bat *Pipistrelle pipistrellus* discovered that there were two distinct groupings within the species. These groupings separated first on sound, with each group calling at a very distinct frequency. The groupings later separated into the same groups on genetic markers, giving the taxonomists the confidence to declare the existence of a new species. Linnaeus's 'perfect form', which gave rise to the original taxon *Pipistrelle pipistrellus*, was not perfect so perfect after all.

## Same name, different idea
Following on from the discovery of the new species within *Pipistrelle pipistrellus*, the crucial element of the Linnaean taxonomic system is the maintenance of the name *Pipistrelle pipistrellus*. This name is kept unchanged, as it still represents a current, valid taxon concept. However, this concept has *changed* across the discovery of the cryptic species.

This change is most evident in the data from pre and post change periods. Any data from pre-change (*Pipistrelle pipistrellus*) may contain both post-change taxa (*Pipistrelle pipistrellus* and *Pipistrelle pygmaeus*). Since there is the potential for the name to no longer directly match the type concept it supposedly represents, we have a **nomenclatural divergence**. 

[Next page](./nomenclatural-divergence.md)